>>More and more, history is
happening faster and faster.
It is said that we in the West
live 50 to 100 times the amount
of sheer experience of
our ancestors of just 100
years ago.
New discoveries and
technologies have
brought tremendous benefits and
opportunities the world over.
But as with anything,
it has come at a price.
With the acceleration in the
speed and volume of experience
we live on a daily
basis, we have
seen a similar acceleration
in the amount of depression,
anxiety, ADD, and
other mood disorders.
Many have turned to
medication looking for relief.
The use of antidepressants
alone has increased nearly 400%
since 1990.
Is there another way to
address this epidemic?
A 5,000-year-old scientific
tradition known as Ayurveda
leads us to believe there is.
>>In Ayurveda, we understand
that the real root
of mental distress
is that we've lost
our understanding of the
true nature of ourselves
and of the world.
>>Today in the
world, if you see,
so many young adults are taking
antidepressant medicines,
especially in the United States.
But this problem is increasing
now all over the world.
What is the reason?
>>In Ayurvedic
philosophy, we would
say the loss of understanding
is due to a covering over
of the deepest, most
important part of the mind.
>>And the things we are doing
from morning to night, either
it is on computers or
cellphones, or watching TV.
>>Too much temptation, too
much stimulation-- and that's
why there are all these problems
of hyperactive disorder,
attention deficit
hyperactive disorder.
>>Too many patients
that do not need drugs,
that are on
pharmaceuticals today
due to the heavy pressure
and marketing and advertising
of the companies themselves.
>>Ayurveda has a completely
different concept
of mental disease.
In fact, it has a completely
different concept of the mind.
>>The system of Ayurveda had its
birth approximately 5,000 years
ago during the Vedic
period in India,
with the first
written recordings
appearing 3,000 years ago.
Its practical application
to holistic health
is as relevant today as
it was in ancient times.
The goal of life is very simply
becoming healthy and happy.
And we can all achieve
this by incorporating
Ayurveda's simple principle
of mindfully feeding our body,
feeding our mind,
and feeding our soul.
>>When we talk about
food, it's not only
what we eat from our mouth.
What we watch, what we smell,
what we hear, what we think,
what we are talking.
>>And learning really how
to think of the senses
as organs that receive food
in the form of impressions,
and to make sure that
that food is nourishing.
>>Everything is
food, and all this
is connected with our mind.
>>Join us as we uncover the
ancient science of Ayurveda
and the unique
opportunity we now
have to incorporate the best
of both Eastern and Western
psychiatric practices
in promoting healing
on a deeper, more
holistic level.
The history of Ayurveda
can trace its roots
back 5,000 years,
when it is said
to have been
acquired by the sages
through divine revelation.
It was passed down through
the generations in oral form,
until it was recorded in
the ancient holy texts known
as the Vedas around 1500 BC, in
the land of the seven rivers,
in the foothills
of the Himalayas.
>>The origins of
Ayurveda occurred
because these wandering
tribes of people
began to organize
themselves into these very
modern contrivances that were
assigned the word "village."
The people that aggregated
in these villages
were doing so for protection
against the elements,
for protection
against enemy tribes,
and also so that they
can adapt a more agrarian
kind of lifestyle, and
grow food and store food
and always have supplies
of food on hand.
As a consequence of
all of these people
coming together in these
concentrations that
hadn't existed before,
there were different kinds
of ailments and afflictions
that had never been seen before.
>>Learned sages and
saints known as rishis,
who devoted their
life to understanding
the realities of
the world, realized
that sickness was
a major impediment
to the search for liberation.
And so many of them became
vijas to help their people.
Vija, the Sanskrit
word for physician,
is derived from the
root word for wisdom.
>>And so a small group of
wise elderly men and women
were sent up into the
foothills of the Himalayas,
where they could be surrounded
by nature and in a very
quiet, contemplative
frame of mind.
>>Our rishis who
used to meditate,
they used to have their
libraries and study rooms.
And they used to have even
their liberties, I would say.
And they were continuously
working or thinking,
trying to find out ways
how the human beings can
become more healthy
and more happy.
>>And what emerged from these
convocations of people--
of wise people-- was
Ayurvedic medicine.
>>Hindu mythology tells us
that Lord Brahma, the creator
of the world, reawakened
the knowledge of Ayurveda
to mankind.
>>This did not involve
scientific method
or empirical
thinking, but rather
this kind of shamanistic,
mystical, direct knowledge
that came to these
people regarding
the nature of disease,
the nature of life,
and the nature of
medical treatment.
>>This stream of Ayurvedic
medical knowledge
was considered eternal, because
it was known by the rishis
to have been there since
the beginning of time.
>>It's an ancient,
spiritual, Vedic scripture.
And they speak about Ayurveda.
It is not a creation of
human mind or human brain.
It was there.
They just received the memory.
>>What is certain is
that the great rishis'
motive was compassion.
Their purpose, to
alleviate human suffering.
And their recorded precepts
were for their disciples,
whom they trained for
the service of humanity,
a tradition which
continues to be performed
5,000 years after its birth.
The history of Western
medicine traces its roots back
to a different time and place,
and followed a much different
path.
It was the year 460 BC,
in the Age of Pericles,
on the island of Cos that
Hippocrates was born.
>>All Western
medical specialties,
including psychiatry,
really originate
with the ancient Greeks.
Hippocrates is called the
father of Western medicine.
Even today, the graduates of
all Western medical schools
take the Hippocratic Oath
when they graduate and become
full-fledged physicians.
>>The people of that time
viewed mental illness
as a form of
punishment by the gods,
or a manifestation of the
devil possessing the suffering
individual.
>>There were no real
treatments for patients.
There were restraints.
There were poisons given.
But the violent
psychiatric patients
were usually put in
chains or killed.
>>Hippocrates, on
the other hand,
believed that diseases
were caused naturally,
not because of
superstition or the gods.
He used the notion of
an imbalance of humors.
These four bodily
fluids were believed
to be influenced by the
environment, the weather,
and food.
>>The goal of ancient
Greek medicine
was actually to restore
balance to these humors,
and thereby restore
physical and mental health.
>>His therapeutic
approach was based
on the healing power of nature.
According to this
doctrine, the body
contains within itself the
power to balance the four humors
and heal itself.
Much of the Greek
medical tradition
had been assimilated
into the Roman Empire.
As Rome slowly
collapsed and Europe
slipped into the Dark Ages,
much of that knowledge was lost.
>>At this point,
the Catholic church
really had control over
all scholarly activities
in the West.
If certain individuals chose
to challenge church doctrine
on any matters of
natural science,
they faced condemnation and
possibly even death for heresy.
>>It wasn't until a
philosopher and mathematician--
a Renaissance man-- found a
novel way of challenging church
doctrine that the next
influential moment
in Western medicine emerged.
>>Rene Descartes was
a major inspiration
for the scientific
revolution that took place
in Europe in the 17th century.
Scientists and
physicians of his day
were prevented from doing
dissections on cadavers.
The church viewed this as a
desecration of God's handiwork.
Rene Descartes said
that all of reality
was divided essentially into two
domains, the spiritual domain
and the material domain.
>>He said that the church
should confine itself
to matters of the
human soul, and leave
the workings of the human body
to the scientists of the day.
The church authorities decided
to accept this argument.
>>That finally opened the
doors for scholars of all sorts
to be able to start
doing experimentation
within the domain of
the natural world.
>>Medicine became
taught in a context
where mind or soul and
the body became split off.
This dualist view of
the would influence
all of Western
thought, including
its approach to healing
both mind and body.
From Descartes' time
to the 19th century,
illness became seen primarily
as a physical phenomenon,
no longer involving the soul.
The mentally ill were typically
viewed more as wild animals,
and harsh treatments
and restraints,
similar to Medieval times,
were seen as therapeutic.
>>In England, people used
to go by a famous asylum
called Bedlam that had
been there for centuries,
looking in through the gates at
the wild, psychotic, peculiar
mental patients.
>>German psychiatrist
Emil Kraepelin,
considered the founder of
modern scientific psychiatry,
spoke out against this
inhumane treatment.
He believed the chief origin
of psychiatric disease
to be biological.
And by identifying
specific disorders,
the progression
of mental illness
can be predicted and treated.
And his theories
dominated psychiatry
at the turn of the 20th century.
>>Perhaps in response
to this overemphasis
on biological factors,
the early 20th century
saw three great pioneers
within psychiatry.
They recognized that, many
times, diseases of the body
actually have their origin
in conflicts and fears based
in the mind, that you couldn't
actually treat mind and body as
though they were separate
from one another.
>>As a result, early
psychiatry split
into two competing traditions,
one emphasizing thoughts,
emotions, and dreams as
the keys to the healing
of mental disorders,
and another that
looked for clues
to these disorders
in the tissues of the brain.
Over the course of 50
years, many offshoots
of Freud's initial
concepts formed,
so many that it became
difficult for the movement
to philosophically
hold together.
Disagreement about
which treatments
matched which symptoms,
and controversy
of the overall effectiveness of
treatment stalled the movement.
And this laid the groundwork
for the course psychiatry
would take to present day.
>>In the second half
of the 20th century,
we witnessed another
major revolution
within the field of psychiatry.
For the first time
ever, medications
were discovered
that could treat,
or at least to some
extent reverse,
some of the symptoms of
major psychiatric illness.
The discovery of these
medication treatments
once again swung
the pendulum back
towards a biological emphasis.
>>Unlike the unbroken 5,000-year
tradition of the holistic
practice of Ayurvedic medicine.
The history of
Western medicine has
seen an ongoing struggle
for the influence--
and often control--
between examining the mind,
examining the body, and
examining the soul in order
to diagnose and heal.
The question is, are
we now on the verge
of moving towards
a new paradigm?
[CHATTER]
>>I feel so out of
sync with my peers.
>>They're all moving
on with their lives,
and I'm just stuck.
>>I find it hard trying to
do everything day to day.
Work.
There's no way to find
that proper balance.
>>I avoid social situations.
>>I'm so uncomfortable
with the way I look.
I don't want people to see me.
>>I know people my age
who have overdosed.
I might overdose.
There's got to be another way.
>>Sometimes, I wish
life was just easier.
>>I don't know what I
want to do with my life.
Seems like so many people
have it figured out.
Scared of change.
>>I barely feel like
doing anything anymore.
I can't even sleep at night.
>>I go through phases of mania.
>>I feel nauseous all the time.
>>And my thoughts race.
>>Racing thoughts.
>>So overwhelming.
Sometimes I just feel
like I have no future.
I have no future.
>>The challenges that our
younger generation now face
have created a surge in
mental health issues,
and Western psychiatry
is grappling
with the most effective way
to address this epidemic.
>>Making a psychiatric diagnosis
can be quite challenging.
Unlike other
medical specialties,
there's no particular
blood test or scans
or x-rays which can make
a definitive diagnosis.
The cornerstone of a
psychiatric diagnosis
really is the
clinical interview.
I'll often begin by asking
the patient how their mood has
been, how their sleeping
patterns have been,
how their appetite and energy
has changed, if at all.
>>And then, you get
a history of all
of the therapies that the
patient has gone through,
drug therapies, psychotherapy,
and a history of all
the medications that have
been given to the patient.
>>And I'll also pay a
great deal of attention
to their nonverbal language,
because that actually
gives me a lot of
information about how
they interact socially.
>>Then, of critical importance
to me is the family history.
And of course, you look at the
history of alcoholism and drug
abuse, which is
critical in taking
a history on any
psychiatric patient.
These two problems
are so prevalent.
>>I'll also review
their medical records
to see what other types
of health problems
they may have encountered,
since this may also
impact their emotional wellness.
>>I want to see an EKG.
I want to see a
biochemical profile
and any neurologic workup.
The reason that we
are so concerned
about the medical
condition-- there
are many medical illnesses
that are mimicked
by psychiatric illness,
and vice versa.
For instance, thyroid
disease oftentimes
is manifested as a
depressed patient.
Cardiac disease
may manifest itself
with palpitations and
symptoms very similar
to an anxiety attack.
Many medical conditions are
accompanied by depression.
>>When we put all of
these parts together,
we get the biopsychosocial
picture of that patient.
>>Finally, the
psychiatrist will match up
this picture with one
of the symptom clusters
that's described in the
"Diagnostics and Statistics
Manual," which
lists all currently
recognized mental
health disorders.
While it's very
rare for a person
to fit every single
diagnostic criteria,
the DSM-IV is the
most widely used tool
in diagnosing mental
health disorders.
>>We're trying to
accurately pinpoint
what are some of the biological
factors that are contributing
to their current picture.
What are some of their
psychological issues that
are also impacting
their emotional health?
And then finally, what are
some of the social issues
and relationship
issues that are making
a contribution to the way that
they're feeling emotionally?
>>One of the most
important realizations
that came from wise
elderly men and women
in the foothills
of the Himalayas
was that the entire world is
composed of five elements.
And those five
elements were seen
to be space, air,
fire, water, and earth.
And what's more, it was seen
that these five elements
not only make up the
universe at large,
but also duplicate themselves
within each human being.
By understanding the elements
and how they combine uniquely
in each individual,
we could understand
the energetic processes at
play in the disease process.
>>These five elements were
seen to form in human beings
into three biological
forces, known as the doshas,
and regulate the structure and
function of both body and mind.
The three doshas are known
as vata, pitta, and kapha.
>>Vata primarily is responsible
for mobility, for movement.
Anything that moves in our
body is powered by vata.
>>From the blinking of the
eyes to the coursing of blood
through the arteries and veins,
to the beating of the heart,
to the movement of thoughts
through the mind-- everywhere
there is the slightest
or grossest movement,
that movement is controlled
by the vata dosha.
>>Pitta is that energy which
is responsible for metabolism.
Anything that we eat is
going to be digested.
It has to be digested.
Then, it has to be metabolized.
>>It's the pitta
dosha that actually
digests food and
impressions from the world
and transforms them into
something nourishing.
It's pitta dosha that
gives us our capacity
for perception and
for understanding.
>>The third energy
in our body is kapha.
Kapha is primarily
water and earth element.
It's like mud and mucus,
like a glue, or the gum.
>>Kapha dosha is what
gives a human being
the cohesive nature.
It's what stops our arms
from falling off our torsos.
It's what gives us the ability
to have long-term memory.
To become attached to
those that we love,
and to empathize with others.
>>Improper functioning
of both body and mind
is caused by an
imbalance of the doshas.
>>In Ayurveda, there are really
three aspects to the treatment.
The first is in the
balancing of the doshas.
This is called the
sam dosha chikitsa.
>>The practitioner
begins by gathering
information on the
patient's symptoms,
their duration,
level of discomfort,
and progression, as
well as their current
mental and physical state.
The practitioner then observes
movement and speech as well as
body and facial characteristics.
Finally, through touch,
the patient's condition
comes into full view.
There is special focus
on the patient's pulse,
as it can help to
determine the functioning
and health of the entire
mind-body constitution,
including the status
of the doshas,
the health of the
various organs,
and advance warning signs
of potential problems.
At the same time that the
practitioner is diagnosing
the balance of the doshas,
which affect both body and mind,
he is also paying
close attention
to three subtle energies
specifically tuned
in to the mind known in
Ayurveda as the gunas.
>>Sattva is that state of
mind when mind is healthy,
which means the mind is
quiet, relaxed, and happy.
And intelligence of
the person is working.
That means the mind
is full of knowledge.
Mind can discriminate
what is good for me,
what is not good for me.
>>Sattva means that a person
has a clear and lucid picture
of the world outside.
You're able to see and
experience the joy of life.
You're able to understand
that although there
are negative occurrences
in the world,
you're able to
maintain at all times
the distinction between
the true self, which
has the nature of
sat-chit-ananda.
You're able to
remember at all times
that you are not the events
that are occurring around you.
However, in both the rajasic
and tamasic forms of mind,
there are distortions
in that understanding.
>>Qualities that tamas
will infuse in the mind
will be dullness,
confusion, sleepiness.
The mind is very shut down.
It's an unclear mind, dull mind.
Often when people are confused,
they do confused actions.
Rajas means if you are very
easily irritated and agitated,
an agitated mind
means rajasic mind.
You're always restless.
The mind cannot relax.
You want to sleep,
and suddenly the mind
says, let me go on the Facebook
and check my friend's status
and post something.
This is called agitated mind.
This is a rajasic mind, a
very, very common problem
in this modern age, I would say.
A majority of the people have
too much rajas in their mind.
All the mental diseases that
we have in this modern time--
depression, manic
depression, bipolar disease--
any of the mental conditions,
according to Ayurveda,
are caused by excess of
rajas and tamas in the mind.
[CHATTER]
>>I started taking
medication and--
>>It's helped a
little bit, but--
>>I have no motivation
to do anything.
>>My depression has gotten
in the way of my schoolwork.
I feel like a failure.
>>I find that I need
medication to get stuff done.
>>It just bothers me
that I'm not normal.
>>Some of my friends
need help, but I
don't know how to give it.
>>Yeah, when I go to
the doctor, she'll
pretty much prescribe
me anything I ask for.
>>When I was a kid, I had
ADD, ADHD, extreme anxiety,
social anxiety.
Dopamine was messed up.
>>I don't know what
to do when someone
admits to me that
they're depressed.
I don't know how to
be there for them,
how to get them to find help.
>>I finally found a
medication that works for me,
but I had to stop taking
it because of side effects.
>>Doctor gives me, this
will probably work.
Is this working?
Is this really not?
Different white pills.
Ridiculous.
>>The brain is really
the most complex organ
in the human body, so it
takes a lot of finesse
to study without
causing damage to it.
That being said, we
do have some idea
about what's going
on in the brain
with particular
psychiatric disorders.
>>Research conducted by the
National Institute of Mental
Health concludes that mental
disorders are actually
brain disorders.
The brain is made up of
approximately 100 billion nerve
cells known as neurons, which
communicate with each other
through over one quadrillion
specialized connections known
as synapses.
These synapses facilitate
an electrochemical process
between the neurons,
utilizing neurotransmitters.
When this electrochemical
process is out of balance,
mental illnesses, such as
depression, ADHD, anxiety,
and other mood
disorders can occur.
Through the use of
psychiatric medication,
doctors aim to restore
balance to this process
and bring relief to the patient.
>>In Western medicine, it's
actually quite challenging
to match a particular
individual's brain chemistry
with a specific medication.
>>When I see a new patient that
has been to 10 psychiatrists
before they come in, on
five, six, seven drugs,
the wrong drugs in
the wrong dosages.
And they have been given
this trial and error
by another doctor
or psychiatrist,
and nothing has worked,
and nothing has worked.
>>Even the very best
of psychiatrists
don't have any better than a 75%
rate of choosing the right drug
in the right dosage at the
right time the first time.
>>Who do you think is
giving most of these drugs?
It's the general practitioner.
It's not the psychiatrist.
And if it's the
psychiatrist, it's
not the psychopharmacologist.
>>They certainly do
receive some training
as part of their medical
education in the prescribing
of these particular drugs.
But their experience
is much, much less
than psychiatrists have.
>>The main reason
patients stop taking
medication is due
to side effects.
Much of the art of
being a psychiatrist
is helping the patient navigate
through the side effects
long enough for the
medication to take effect,
a skill many primary care
physicians simply don't have.
Western psychiatry
is looking once again
toward scientific innovation
to address this problem.
>>The matching of
particular medications
with particular
patients is really
the holy grail of all
medical specialties.
It's now called
"personalized medicine."
The idea is that we
can get to a point
where we can genetically map
what's going on with them when
they're suffering from the
effects of some particular kind
of disorder of illness.
We're not at that stage yet, but
that's certainly the direction
that Western medicine
is heading in.
>>It's a loaded question.
Everyone says, which is
better, medication or therapy?
I have to say in my
practice that the two are
equally essential.
I do not believe
the drug is going
to work as effectively as
a psychiatrist that reaches
a patient, has a compassion
for the suffering
that the patient's
going through.
The way the patient
feels about the doctor
is incredibly important for
us, along with the medication.
>>And yet, due to the higher
cost of a psychiatrist's time,
outpatient clinics will often
split the patient's treatment
by hiring non-physician
mental health
providers, such as social
workers, psychologists,
and family therapists to
conduct psychotherapy.
>>A second issue that sort
of discourages psychiatrists
from being able to
practice psychotherapy
within their
clinical practices is
that insurance reimbursement
for physician-delivered
psychotherapy tends
to be very, very poor.
>>And so the patient
often finds herself
in a situation which
is driven in large part
by cost, rather than potential
therapeutic effectiveness.
However, even in the
less than ideal business
of Western medicine, psychiatry,
when practiced at its highest
level, has shown the ability
to change lives, save lives,
and measurably enhance
the quality of life.
>>Mental disease
is created because
of one thing and one thing only.
And that one thing is something
known as avidya, or ignorance.
According to Ayurveda,
what we are ignorant of
is our true nature.
We assign our identity to things
that are not truly ourselves.
We think of things as permanent
which are impermanent.
We think of things as important
which are, in reality, trivial.
We're not really sure
what we're made of
and what our true nature is.
>>According to
Ayurveda, the mind
has a specific organ which is
responsible for discriminating
what is true and
what is not true,
which is known as the buddhi.
>>What happens in
mental disease is
that this discriminating
function of the mind
becomes covered with
residues of past experiences,
past unresolved emotions.
And these residues cover the
buddhi like waves in a mirror.
>>We have so many
experiences, so many traumas,
so many different
kinds of difficulties
that we have faced.
And if those things-- we stay
connected with those things,
they are thrown into
my external mind, which
is my brain and
the nervous system.
>>This discriminating function
no longer operates normally.
And the perception, not only
of our world but of oneself,
becomes distorted.
This is the source of
anxiety, depression,
and all the different
types of mental diseases
that we see today.
>>Every experience
creates scar on the mind,
impression on the mind.
Every part creates
groove on the brain.
So total number of
scar is samskara.
>>Samskaras are like
this great storehouse
of ideas and thoughts
and impressions
that can become associated
mistakenly with the self.
And then, one finds oneself
wanting things, thinking
things, and spontaneously
acting in ways
which really have no basis.
>>We can always create
new impressions.
We can always create
new samskaras.
In Ayurveda, we
go more deeper, we
go into the subconscious mind.
We go into the hard disk.
And we try to look, what are
the viruses in the hard disk?
And how can I clean up those
viruses and put new programs?
What we emphasize
more is on putting
new program or new impressions.
>>Samskaras can be built
up through education,
through learning, through
inquiring, through discipline.
And word discipline
means to learn.
And one who is
learning is disciple.
So we all are the disciple of
life, and life is our teacher.
>>The right lifestyle
means the lifestyle
which is good for my body,
which is good for my mind, which
is good for my senses,
which is good for my soul.
Complete, holistic lifestyle.
If you want to see
the underlying factor,
then it is our
lifestyle or the food.
>>Food becomes a part of
blood, part of plasma,
part of nervous system.
Food nourishes the mind.
Food becomes consciousness.
That's why food is very
important, what type of food
we eat.
Because it will not
nourish only the body,
but it will become mind
and the consciousness.
>>In Ayurveda, we
say that all people
should eat in a clean
way, but at the same time,
in a way that's most suited to
their individual constitution.
>>The food you're
eating might be
very good for your
physical body.
It might be full of
proteins, carbohydrates,
and all those
vitamins and minerals.
But it could be causing
disturbments or agitation.
Anything that we eat can be
classified into these three
categories, sattvic,
rajasic, and tamasic.
If the food that we
are eating is sattvic,
that will enhance the
clarity of my mind.
That will enhance
the knowledge system.
That will help me discriminate
between what is good for me
and what is not good for me.
But if I'm eating food which
is more rajasic and tamasic,
it will create more confusion,
negativity, aggression,
irritation, more
depression in my mind.
>>Ayurveda currently
uses approximately 1,200
individual plant-based products
that include different plant
parts, such as leaves and
stems and roots and seeds.
>>The category of
plant-based medicines
that are prescribed
for mental diseases
are known as the
medhya rasayana drugs.
>>The medhya rasayanas
enhance biological nourishment
and increase the oxygen
supply to the brain.
Thousands of years
of use has shown
that these medicinal
herbs address
mental disease, such
as depression, anxiety,
and other mood disorders without
the side effects often seen
with the use of Western
psychiatric medicine.
>>Oiling in the body is a
very important procedure
which also connects
with the mind
and helps to enhance compassion.
The word in Sanskrit
for oil is sneha.
And sneha also means love.
Love can heal all problems,
specifically mental problems.
>>It stimulates nerve endings,
and their nerve ending
releases certain neuropeptides.
And these are the
same neuropeptides
that are released in your
central nervous system.
>>Panchakarma, Ayurveda's
detoxification program,
includes treatments such as
abhyanga and shirodhara, which
utilize oils.
These treatments balance
neurotransmission
while also detoxifying
body and mind,
removing obstacles
interfering with good health,
and giving the capacity
for clear thinking.
>>In much of India, yoga and
Ayurveda are taught together.
They're not separate
disciplines.
It coordinates the functions
of the muscles and the nerves,
both the central nervous system
and the peripheral nervous
system, into one
coordinated function.
>>Unfortunately, now most
people think yoga is gymnastics,
and yoga is some kind
of physical exercise.
Yoga is a complete
system like Ayurveda.
And ultimately, yoga leads
us to that state of mind
when the mind is completely
free of all the citta
vritti, the desires
which are actually
arising from your
subconscious mind.
>>When certain postures
are adopted and held along
with the correct
breathing techniques,
the channels that contain
specific doshas can open up.
And doshas which may have
been stuck or maintained
inappropriately
in certain tissues
or in certain parts of mind
can be released spontaneously
and experienced by the adept.
In meditation practices,
we are instructed
not to label the thoughts.
As a treatment modality
in Ayurvedic psychiatry,
we teach people indeed
to label the thoughts
that they see as they
arise as one of two things,
either useful or positive,
or not useful or negative.
And simply by seeing
the thought processes
and being able to label
them as one or the other
not only creates in itself
a calm state of mind,
but it actually opens
the door for the removal
of deeper emotional
stains on the mind, which
can lead to the cure of many
kinds of mental conditions.
>>Thousands of
years of experience
has shown that these Ayurvedic
treatments have the ability
to significantly
improve the patient's
overall mental and
physical health.
>>These last two
decades in America,
they say mind-body medicine,
mind-body medicine.
In Ayurveda, this
mind-body medicine
is from thousands of years.
Still, they are
missing the spirit.
Mind, body, and spirit--
that also needs some healing.
>>The reason I
picked psychiatry,
even within Western
medicine, was
that it seemed to be the
discipline that actually seemed
to come the closest to
at least acknowledging
a connection between
mind and body.
And it seemed to
me that among all
of those other alternative
systems of medicine,
Ayurveda was really
the most complete
in how mind and
body are related,
how human beings interact
with their environment,
how the environment
actually impacts us.
>>One of the issues with
using conventional treatments
like psychotherapy
or medications
is that both require the patient
to have the help of an expert
to aid in their healing.
Ayurveda empowers patients,
giving them control and input
into their own healing through
proper lifestyle, diet, detox
and rejuvenation
programs, pranayama, yoga,
and meditation.
>>I think that it's very
important that we not
stigmatize people for
using these medications
when it's appropriate and when
they are benefiting from it,
and when it really
allows that person
to adapt to their environment.
>>One reason that more people
that need these medications
are receiving
treatment is better
training in
recognizing symptoms.
However, there is
growing concern
that psychiatric medication is
often prescribed unnecessarily.
>>I do think that there's a
real problem when society wants
to solve every little
experience that
is unpleasant by medicating it.
>>The mental attitude of
people in this country
and the pharmaceutical
industry is
that for every twisted
molecule, there
is a drug that will untwist it.
But any child that is unruly,
hyperactive, can't sit still,
distracted-- wham.
They get slapped
this label and get
this pill put in their mouth.
And many of these
kids do not need it.
>>When we start looking
at other emotions
like anger, sadness, anxiety,
and so on, the idea of a cure
starts to become
less and less clear.
What exactly does that mean?
Does that mean that we're trying
to strive towards a situation
where none of us are ever
angry, none of us are ever sad,
none of us are ever anxious?
Is that what we mean by a
cure for mental health issues?
>>Ayurveda believes
these emotions often
exist for a reason.
And there is a role
and a value in working
through our struggles and
suffering, that we actually
become richer for being able
to do that self-inquiry,
and understanding
that suffering is not
synonymous with disorder.
>>Suffering and
depression, for example,
are not one and the same.
An individual can suffer
and not be depressed.
There can be a lot to be
gained by suffering sometimes,
in terms of understanding
our own humanity
and our connection to
generations and generations
that have gone before us
and that will come after us.
>>In the Ayurvedic
view, it's not
the culture that's causing
the mental disease, but rather
the other way around.
It's the distortions in
the mind that is actually
creating our misguided culture.
>>We tend to limit
ourselves by identifying
with certain external
circumstances,
or with how tall or
short our body is,
or how well we
performed on an exam.
>>Not only just
becoming successful
in our materialistic
world or becoming famous
or becoming rich.
This is fine.
This is a part of Ayurveda.
We do talk about
economic development.
What we also talk
about in Ayurveda
is how do you become
self-realized?
How do you know the real you?
>>In the vision
of the Vedas, it's
actually the birthright
of every human being
to realize our essential nature.
And our essential nature is joy.
Our essential nature is wisdom.
Our essential nature is peace.
>>The real goal, from
an Ayurvedic standpoint,
is to have a vital and long life
which will allow an individual
to really seek moksa, or
spiritual enlightenment.
>>If I could tell a young person
one thing that would start them
on the journey towards healing,
it would probably be this.
Develop some type of practice
that allows you to turn inward,
that allows you to look
inside yourself and develop
the skill and the
patience and the tolerance
to actually be
alone with yourself.
>>Mind is a beautifully innocent
instrument of experience.
We should develop
friendship with the mind.
Oh, my mind, you
are my best friend.
You are my chum.
You are my companion.
>>If we can engage our young
people in the fascinating study
of discovering the true
nature of their mind,
initially by simply
witnessing their own thoughts,
then we have a chance
of maybe reversing
some of the cultural
harms that we see today.
>>How do you become
self-realized?
How do you know the real you?
Then, based on
that consciousness,
you then connect with your body.
You then connect with
your outer world,
connect with your friends,
connect with the universe.
>>Although it seems that we
are separate individuals,
it's all interconnected,
interpenetrated, whole.
That's the knowledge
that will disinfect
the mind from its ignorance.
>>One day, sit down
for five minutes
and see where are you going.
Which way are you heading?
What are you trying to achieve?
Are you really trying to
become happy in your life?
You don't have to just
necessarily follow the crowd.
You just have to follow
your own inner instinct.
Try to sit down, relax, and
find time to be with yourself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>My son was diagnosed with
Attention Deficit Disorder,
ADD.
And of course, as a
young mom, I wanted
to look into what my options
were, other than medication.
>>It was really just
basic principles
of mother nature and physics.
It just made sense.
>>When I first left football,
my body was a wreck.
My emotions were a wreck, and
my life was a wreck, basically.
It was amazing.
Just eating the right
foods and doing yoga really
helped change things
around very quickly.
>>Professional athletes, Fortune
500 companies, entertainers,
stay-at-home moms--
doesn't matter.
As long as you're
human, it applies.
>>I looked into all kinds of
different healing modalities.
And when I found Ayurveda,
I found a lot of solutions.
>>I felt like I had a lot of
money and I had a lot of fame,
but I was lost.
Over the past seven
or eight years
in studying yoga, Ayurveda, and
meditation, I found my path.
And now, my life has
improved so much.